%*****************************************
\chapter{Future}\label{chapter:future}
%*****************************************

\section{from related models (EM-ONE)}

The EM-ONE architecture does not have an explicit self-reflective
layer that contains these types of self-reflective thinking.  The SALS
AI makes an attempt to keep a clear distinction between the types of
knowledge that are available to each reflective layer of mind.  The
SALS AI does not contain self-reflective knowledge in its deliberative
or reflective layers of thinking because if this knowledge is allowed
to exist in these lower layers, this introduces ``loopy'' knowledge
references that confuse the purely hierarchical control structure that
currently exists in the SALS AI.  For example, the deliberative layer
of the SALS AI can only manipulate physical knowledge as the
reflective layer in the SALS AI can only reference deliberative
knowledge and indirectly reference the physical knowledge that the
deliberative knowledge references.  The fact that the reflective layer
in the SALS AI cannot reference higher layers of reflective knowledge,
such as self-reflective knowledge, is consistent with the SALS
architecture's strictly hierarchical knowledge organization between
reflective layers of control.  The SALS AI is currently limited to the
knowledge of the bottom four layers of the Emotion Machine
architecture.

\section{from related models (metacognition)}

The Emotion Machine theory makes a distinction between layers of
reflective knowledge and self-reflective knowledge that is not clearly
distinguished in the metacognitive theory.  The implemented SALS
architecture is currently only an implementation of reflective
thinking but implementing self-reflective thinking, what the cognitive
science literature would refer to as ``theory of mind,'' will be
described as a future extension of the SALS architecture in
{\mbox{\autoref{chapter:future}}}.  The Emotion Machine theory of
self-reflective thinking is a higher-level form of thinking than
simply reflecting and controlling a deliberative or object level
thought process.  The Emotion Machine theory of self-reflective
thinking describes how humans think of themselves and others in terms
of abstract models of their ``selves,'' different subpersonalities
that depend on the current problem solving or social context.
\cite{minsky:2006} begins his description of ``selves'' as analogous
to how one might think of others:
\begin{quote}
How do people construct their Self-models?  We'll start by asking
simpler questions about how we describe our acquaintances.  Thus, when
Charles tries to think about his friend Joan, he might begin by
describing some of her characteristics.  These could include his ideas
about: the appearance of Joan's body and face, the range and qualities
of her abilities, her motives, goals, aversions, and tastes, the ways
in which she is disposed to behave, her various roles in the social
world.
\end{quote}
{\mbox{\autoref{figure:emotion_machine_multiple_models_of_self}}}
shows a few examples of different subpersonalities or ``selves'' that
Minsky explains a person may use to think in different contexts.
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=8cm]{gfx/emotion_machine_multiple_models_of_self}
\caption{Multiple models of self.}
\label{figure:emotion_machine_multiple_models_of_self}
\end{figure}
The metacognitive meta-level could be said to map to both reflective
and self-reflective layers of thinking in the Emotion Machine.


\section{old beginning}


The Emotion Machine cognitive architecture has interesting
implications for the future of AI.  The ability to reflectively learn
in $n$ layers has not yet been shown, but the linear slowdown of this
implementation with the addition of reflection, along with the
potential for no slowdown on ideal concurrent shared memory
architectures point toward learning much more useful information in
one-shot learning situations, where learning is costly or dangerous.

\section{Learning Object and Subject Distinctions}
\label{section:objective_reflection}

Although this model is based upon an assumption of objects and their
relationships, the ability of the AI to learn new object type
abstractions and subjective perspectives is future research for the
architecture.  Having the architecture abstract its own types of
objects and ways of using these objects would be useful in the
deliberative layer for learning physical object types, but the ability
to abstract object types and subjective perspectives becomes more
interesting in the metacognitive layers because this may lead to
concepts of problems as types of objects that may be solved through
different representational perspectives.

The ability to abstract object and subject distinctions within the
mind is a key that may lead to the abstraction of a concept of
``self'' objects within the AI, as it makes distinctions between those
physical objects that it thinks of as its body versus those physical
objects that it thinks about as an environment.  The most important
and the first subject and object distinctions may be those that help
accomplish or avoid physical goals.  The separation between the
physical body and the physical world is an objective form of thinking
that could partially be caused by goals that emphasize distinguishing
bodily and worldly goals in the causal structures of the physical type
knowledge.  For example, \cite{bongard:2006} demonstrates an approach
referred to as ``motor babbling'' that uses a non-reflective model in
order to learn a physical self-model.

\section{The Self-Conscious Layer and Social Goals}

If we are going to develop a theory of social goals, how do we begin
to model the cooperative and non-cooperative thought processes that
would constitute working toward or against other people? It has been
shown that the neural circuits that are involved in how someone thinks
about what someone else knows are largely distinct from the circuits
involved in perceptual capabilities \cite[]{bedny:2009}. There have
also been distinctions shown between the neural circuits involved in
how someone thinks about what someone else knows and executive control
of actions \cite[]{saxe:2006}. There is good reason to believe that
the learning of social behavior is bootstrapped from learning causal
physical models \cite[]{perner:1991}.

\section{A Physically Grounded Social Problem Domain}

The IsisWorld simulation \cite[]{smith:2010} is a rigid-body physics
simulation that is capable of handling semantic commonsense objects
and actions involved in kitchen cooking tasks.  In order to help us
define a grounded problem domain, I have chosen to focus on a
rigid-body physical simulation of parents and children in the context
of basic cooking tasks in a kitchen environment. I chose parents and
children because I feel that major parts of social learning develops
during early stages involving these familiar social relationships. I
chose the domain of basic kitchen cooking tasks because this is a
non-trivial social commonsense reasoning domain that exists in some
form in all human cultures.

\section{The Self/Other Distinction and Self-Reflective Thinking}

I have described \cite[]{morgan:2011} a theory of how self-reflective
states are communicated or inferred in other agents by correlating a
physical perceptual stream with a reflective perceptual stream,
allowing the agent to use these correlations to predict the reflective
states of other agents based purely on their physical actions. For
example, if one agent performs a series of physical actions in order
to accomplish a goal, such as preparing a slice of buttered toast
using a knife and a loaf of bread and some butter in a kitchen, then
these actions have been correlated with this agent's reflective
states, including the current goals that the agent is pursuing. If
this agent then sees the physical world changing, and he knows that he
is not causing those changes, then he can attempt to infer the state
of mind of another agent. This type of inference process, based on the
previous correlations of physical and reflective perceptual streams,
is what could be referred to as a self-reflective thought process. A
self-reflective thought process introduces the social distinction
between Self and Other reflective state knowledge that is inferred by
using the previously learned correlations between physical perceptions
and reflective perceptions.  This is a type of self-reflective
knowledge that is knowledge that allows thinking about what someone
else is thinking about.  Sometimes this self-reflective knowledge is
referred to as "theory of mind" knowledge in the cognitive science
literature.

With self-reflective knowlege, an agent can choose to act
altruistically by helping another agent accomplish their goals or
maliciously by working against their goals. However, there is the
possibility that an agent is not always running a self-reflective
process that pays attention to another agent's physical actions in
order to infer what their goals might be. In many cases, such as in
the IsisWorld physical simulation of parents and children in a
kitchen, some agents might focus single-mindedly on a novel task
without thinking about what the goals of surrounding agents might
be. This type of model allows for an agent that works against the
goals of another agent without knowing the goals of the other
agent. One might argue that this type of situation where one agent
clobbers the goals of another agent is due to a form of
self-reflective laziness and not due to malicious intentions.

\section{Guilt, Pride, and Self-Conscious Thinking}

It is interesting to consider how children learn from parents as well
as how parents guide a child's cooperative behavior, but to study this
type of thinking, the AI must be extended in order to allow for
modelling what one agent thinks about what another agent thinks about
her.  This form of double reflective recursion is self-conscious
knowledge and the problems that are represented in this type of
knowledge are handled by what is called self-conscious thought
processes. For example, a little boy may be cooking something in the
kitchen and he may carelessly work against the goals of his sister;
this situation may be recognized by an onlooking parent, and the
parent may inform the boy of a self-reflective mistake he has made:
"Ralph, your sister was going to use some of that butter that you just
finished." The little boy, Ralph in this case, thinks that his mother
thinks that he made a self-reflective mistake. I hypothesize that
modelling this form of double reflective recursion in conjunction with
respectful social relationships may be useful for understanding
emotions such as Guilt and Pride.  I have described
\cite[]{morgan:2010} a theory of children could learn cooperative
behavior in the context of a supervisory parent that makes corrections
to different layers of knowledge within the child's mind, up to
self-reflective knowledge.

\section{Imprimers}

\cite{minsky:2006} explains that terms like Guilt and Pride can refer
to self-conscious ways of thinking.  Minsky hypothesizes that there
are powerful ways of thinking that result when someone whom one
respects, like a parent, values or devalues their goals.  This type of
relationship between object models is named an \emph{imprimer
  relationship} by Minsky.  In this relationship, the parent plays the
role of what Minsky has named an \emph{imprimer}, in reference to the
ability of ducklings to learn, relatively arbitrarily, to trust and
follow a parent-like figure.  He hypothesizes that imprimers, such as
parents and caregivers, play an important role in unquestioned
knowledge inheritance in children.  This type of thinking about what
someone else is thinking about their goals may require at least two
recursions of self-reflective abstraction and thinking.

